
The Project : Fake News Filters

Playing the game of the fake : sprawling some fake news. You manipulate the informations. Online platform where you can create your selfie with involved/politics filters from fake news. In the aesthetics of Snapchat App, i mixed symbols and catch phrases in order to compose a filter, about fake informations founded on internet. 

What is true today in internet photography or in media ? Fake news. Fake images. All the same photographs, all the same colors, all the same positions, all the same selfies, all the same faces... How many different apps exist to add filters on our photographs, how many different apps do we need to filter, adjust our photographs, how many apps do we need to have the best photo ever on our instagram ? Face Swap, Makeup plus, Body Shape surgery, Beauty cam, paint lab, line camera, musemage, pomelo absolute filters, vs. cam, whitagram, PIP camera editor, Kalos, snapseed, meitu, … We are lost in filters. But we love it.  What kind of informations can we transpose to people threw random selfies photographs ? We transpose our emotions, our action in life, sometime political opinion. What if we could transpose values for society ? What if we could fight for the right to know in our society ? What if we could change the way we make selfies and share it ? In that way my project is acting. I want that my project can fight against this right to know the truth. What is true today in internet news ? Fake news. Fake informations. The simple act to share the Selfie fake news filters could maybe move the system of the way we see news. 
The fact was deceitful. How to combine this two researches about fake news and filters on applications ? The connection was the words : Fake and Viral. I tried to imagine the beginning of a fake news from a picture. Words can be catched, but images have an another kind of impact, sometimes stronger. A lot of fake news are spread with images, most of the time photoshopped pictures or just pictures taking out of context. Information is a product to exchange, whatever it’s validity, as long as it will have on the market supply and demand. So using symbols and 3D images to accentuate the phrases was not a bad idea. The concept will be stronger, because optical. It was not so easy to find symbols or images related to some topics. You need to focus on the simple things, the simple and directly images that can be related easily to a topic. The atmosphere with the colors and the shape of the design is a big part of the creation. Less elements there is, more easy you will understand the topic.
Humor is one of the key on this project. I wanted to create a satirical intention when the user was making the selfie. Because he knows the reality and the truth about the information he is using.
The detail that makes the project interesting to share is the small logo on it that says it’s a fake news. Sprawling fake news selfies is nice, but showing that it’s fake news behind give the power to the user who is not sprawling fake news with no reason, but the reason to make fun of it.
I wanted to create at first a response of fun/entertainment and in second time surprise. Filters in Snapchat are used most of the time to have fun, distract yourself.. So i wanted to have the feeling to use the same kind of filters, but when you discover the topic, there it’s interesting. The website will ask you to turn your webcam on, to be able to detect your face, then you choose a fake news title on the list. Camera will detect your face and put the filter on you, with the good size. I looked for some face recognition software : i chose FaceNet from Google, an open source software. You have now a functional selfie ready to be shared (links to social network like Facebook or instagram) to share some fake news.

To create the filters i used photoshop and blender. Work method : i surched before on internet some pictures that was related to the topic. For example for the filter « Bank Offshore », the fake is : president Macron (France) would have a bank account in the Bahamas (Place known because of free taxes on bank account - a tax haven). I looked first about bahamas, what can be simple when you think at it : Palm Tree, sunglasses and sun. In a second time, money, fly money to give the impression of profusion and liberty. The element that could be related to Macron, or at least a boss was a tie. The type design is also a big part of the project. Titles need to be short, catchy and powerful. For it, the design need to be attractive, not boring. Looking for the right typography was maybe the key to give he atmosphere for the filter. I tried to analyse the titles that already exist on Snapchat, you can create your own Geofilters, with your catchy phrases or the place you took the snap. The aesthetic is really kitch for some filters. You have glossy, lights effects, flat design, curves and fantasy types with symbols. 
